Clean up text for setup and data exploration chunk of DE instruction (#596)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq-advanced/04-differential_expression.Rmd

## Set Up

```{r setup}
# set seed for reproducibility
set.seed(2022)

# load libraries
library(magrittr) # the pipe (%>%)
library(SingleCellExperiment) 
library(ggplot2) # plotting functions

# package used for differential expression analysis
library(DESeq2)
```

Prior to integration all 10 samples have gone through the same filtering, normalization, and dimensionality reduction.
These 10 samples were then merged into one `SingleCellExperiment` object following the same steps outlined in `03-dataset_integration.Rmd`.
The merged object was then integrated to obtain a corrected gene expression assay and corrected reduced dimensionality results.
The final `SingleCellExperiment`(SCE) object, stored in `data/rms/integrated/rms_all_sce.rds`.

We also have provided a metadata file, `data/rms/annotations/rms_sample_metadata.tsv`, that contains information from each sample, such as diagnosis, sex, age, etc.
In this file each row corresponds to a sample found in the integrated SCE object.

To begin, let's set up our directories and files:

```{r filepaths}
# set up file paths 
# data directory for RMS data
data_dir <- file.path("data", "rms")

> # integrated file containing all libraries to use for DE analysis

Author: This is leftover from when I started to convert text to use libraries instead but then we went back, I'll revert this.

```{r read files}
# read in the SCE object that has already been integrated
integrated_sce <- readr::read_rds(integrated_sce_file)

# read in sample metadata file 
sample_metadata <- readr::read_tsv(sample_metadata_file)
```

## Dataset Exploration

Before we dive into differential expression, let's explore our integrated SCE object and the dataset a little more.

We'll start by looking at what's inside the object.
Here we should have data from both the uncorrected and the corrected, integrated data for both the gene expression data and the reduced dimensionality results.
How are those stored in our object?

```{r dimnames }
# look at the assay names in our object
assayNames(integrated_sce)

# look at the names of the dimensionality reduction present in the SCE object
reducedDimNames(integrated_sce)
```

When we look at the assay names we should see that there are 3 matrices, `counts`, `logcounts`, and `fastmnn_corrected`. 
The `counts` and `logcounts` assay correspond to the uncorrected gene expression data that has just been merged and has NOT been integrated.
The `fastmnn_corrected` data contains the corrected gene expression data obtained from integration. 

> For this exercise we will not be using the `fastmnn_corrected` data (more on why not once we get to setting up the differential expression), but we need to be aware that it is present and be able to distinguish it from our uncorrected data. 

Author: I think we might be able to make a plot (like the violin) plot we have at the end with the corrected data instead of `logcounts` and show that you get negative gene expression values? I don't know if that's really necessary though.

In the `reducedDim` slots you should see `PCA` and `UMAP` which both correspond to the pre-integrated dimensionality reduction results.
Both the `fastmnn_PCA` and `fastmnn_UMAP` obtain the dimensionality reduction calculated post-correction and integration.
Let's start by looking at the UMAP of our data and labeling each sample.

> Which reduced dimensionality slot should we use for making our UMAP plot?

Reviewer: not a slot, right? reducedDim itself is the slot. So, which reduced dim

For today's example, we are particularly interested in comparing the gene expression across cell types in samples from patients diagnosed with ARMS vs. samples from patients diagnosed with ERMS.
To help us out later on when we are performing our analysis and making plots, let's incorporate the information in this sample metadata table into the `colData` of the integrated SCE object.
This will allow us to match each of the samples in the SCE object with the diagnosis group.

```{r modify coldata}
# add the sample metadata to the colData from the integrated SCE object
coldata_df <- colData(integrated_sce) %>%
  # convert from DataFrame to data.frame
  as.data.frame() %>%
  # merge with sample metadata 
  dplyr::left_join(sample_metadata, by = c("sample" = "library_id")) %>%
  # create a new columns
  dplyr::mutate(cell_id = paste(sample, barcode, sep = "-"), # combination of barcode and sample
                # simplify subdiagnosis for easy plotting and DE later
                diagnosis_group = forcats::fct_recode(
                  subdiagnosis,
                  "ARMS" = "Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma",
                  "ERMS" = "Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma"

>                 ))

Author: I needed it for creating some of the plots to evaluate DE results later on and it was helpful to have as a column in the coldata. I want to leave it in for now, but when I get to cleaning up that chunk I can play around with removing it.

# add modified data.frame back to SCE as DataFrame
colData(integrated_sce) <- DataFrame(coldata_df, row.names = coldata_df$cell_id)

# take a look at the new modified colData
head(colData(integrated_sce))
```

Now when we look at the `colData` of the SCE object we should see new columns, including the `diagnosis_group` column which indicates if each cell comes from an ERMS or ARMS sample.
We can now use that column to label any UMAP plots (or other plot types) that we make.
In the below chunk we will color our cells by subdiagnosis.

```{r diagnosis group UMAP}
# UMAP of all samples, separating by diagnosis group
scater::plotReducedDim(integrated_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       colour_by = "diagnosis_group",
                       point_size= 0.5,
                       point_alpha = 0.2) 
```

> Interestingly, it looks like samples from the ARMS and ERMS subdiagnoses tend to integrate with or samples of the same subdiagnosis rather than integrate all together. 

Reviewer: extra "or"? 

I might phrase this more as "subdiagnoses tend to cluster together"

In the integration notebook we also looked at the distribution of cell types after integration.
We expect that cells of the same cell type should integrate with other cells of the same type.
Is that the case with this dataset?

_A word of caution when evaluating the cell type results for this dataset: The cell types for this dataset were assigned in a two stage process.
The first stage assigned cells as tumor or non-tumor.
The next stage further classified tumor cells into type of tumor cell (i.e., myoblast, myocyte, or mesoderm).

> Not all samples contain tumor cells that were further classified and samples will either have all `Tumor` or a mix of `Tumor_Mesoderm`, `Tumor_Myoblast`, and `Tumor_Myocyte`._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some samples could not be further classified, so all of their tumor cells are denoted Tumor.
The samples which could be further classified have a mix of `Tumor_Mesoderm`, `Tumor_Myoblast`, and `Tumor_Myocyte`._
```

```{r celltype UMAP}
# # UMAP of all libraries, separating by diagnosis group and labeling cell type
scater::plotReducedDim(integrated_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       # color each point by cell type
                       colour_by = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size= 0.5, 
                       point_alpha = 0.4)
```

Unlike with the previous datasets we have seen where all cells of the same cell type always grouped together, this dataset shows some slightly different patterns.
We see that there are at least 2 clear distinct groups for each cell type, 1 in each half of the UMAP.

> It looks like this is because the difference in diagnosis group accounts for differences across all cells in the sample, even those from the same type. 

Reviewer: "even those from the same type" reads as ambiguous here - cell or diagnosis?

> We can take advantage of another `ggplot` tool, the `facet_wrap()` function to look at two (or more, but we'll start with two) variables in the `colData` at once - the cell type and the subdiagnosis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can take advantage of the `facet_wrap()` function from `ggplot2` to look at two (or more, but we'll start with two) variables in the `colData` at once - the cell type and the subdiagnosis.
```

In the below plot we will color our cells by cell type but we will also use `facet_wrap()` to plot the cells from each subdiagnosis in their own separate panel of the plot.

```{r celltype subdiagnosis UMAP}
# # UMAP of all libraries, separating by diagnosis group and labeling cell type
scater::plotReducedDim(integrated_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       # color each point by cell type
                       colour_by = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size= 0.5, 
                       point_alpha = 0.4,

>                        other_fields = "diagnosis_group") +

Reviewer: Add a comment here that this is needed for `scater` appeasement.
They will have already seen this in the integration notebook but a reminder can't hurt, because it's weird!

```

As expected, we see that the visual clusters of cell types are being separated most likely due to different subdiagnoses.
Although we expect that the same cell types are present in both, each of the subdiagnoses for rhabdomyosarcoma have a distinct genomic and epigenomic landscape, likely accounting for the global gene expression changes seen between samples from these two subdiagnoses in the UMAP ([Shern _et al._ 2014](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0639), [Stewart _et al._](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2018.07.012)).

We can also use a stacked barplot to look at the distribution of cell types across each sample.

```{r celltype barplot}
# filter coldata data.frame to only include tumor cells
tumor_cells_df <- coldata_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(stringr::str_detect(celltype_broad, "Tumor"))

# create a stacked barplot
ggplot(tumor_cells_df, aes(x = sample, fill = celltype_broad)) + 
    geom_bar(color = "black", size = 0.2) +
    labs(
      x = "Library",
      y = "Number of cells", 
      fill = "Cell type"
    ) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90))+
  # split by diagnosis group 
  # only show non-NA values on x-axis

>   facet_wrap(~diagnosis_group, scales = "free_x")

Author: No, but there is one sample that doesn't have any cell types assigned so that sample won't show up here. It gets removed when we filter to only samples with tumor cells.

>   facet_wrap(~diagnosis_group, scales = "free_x")

Reviewer 2: Ah... that explains it. We should probably explicitly note that somewhere

```

Similar to the UMAP, this plot shows that ARMS and ERMS share a lot of the same cell types, although it is likely that these cell types may have distinct gene expression patterns defined by the associated subdiagnosis.

We also see that only 6 of these libraries have tumor cells that have been further classified into cell type. 
3 libraries contain cells that are only classified as tumor or non-tumor, and tumor cells are not further classified and the remaining library appears to not have been assigned any cell types, as they are all labeled with `NA`.

> We will continue our analysis only using the 6 libraries with fully classified cell types, removing the other 3 before we proceed with differential expression.

Reviewer: If we really want to shorten this notebook, especially the "preamble" before actually getting into DE, we could consider just starting off with those 6 libraries from the get-go? But, I do like the exploration and I think it's important to see how these kinds of analysis sausages get made. 
Maybe DE is just our longest day!

The reason we want to pare down our list of samples to consider is that we want to ensure that the cell types (or subpopulations) that we are interested in are present in all samples included in our differential gene expression analysis. 

> We would want to remove any samples that do not contain our population of interest as they would have no counts to contribute to the differential expression analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to remove any samples that do not contain our cell population(s) of interest as they have no counts to contribute to the differential expression analysis.
```

                       colour_by = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size= 0.5, 
                       point_alpha = 0.4,
                       # tell scater that we want to use diagnosis_group for plotting
                       other_fields = "diagnosis_group") +
  # split plots by diagnosis group 
  facet_wrap(~ diagnosis_group)
```

As expected, we see that the visual clusters of cell types are being separated, most likely due to different RMS subtypes.

We can also use a stacked barplot to look at the distribution of cell types across each sample.

```{r celltype barplot}
# filter coldata data.frame to only include tumor cells
tumor_cells_df <- coldata_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(stringr::str_detect(celltype_broad, "Tumor"))

# create a stacked barplot
ggplot(tumor_cells_df, aes(x = sample, fill = celltype_broad)) + 
    geom_bar(position = "fill", color = "black", size = 0.2) +
    labs(
      x = "Library",
      y = "Number of cells", 
      fill = "Cell type"
    ) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, vjust = 0.5))+
  # split by diagnosis group 
  # only show non-NA values on x-axis

>   facet_wrap(~diagnosis_group, 
>              scales = "free_x")

Reviewer 2: Using the new format for ggplot faceting (`vars()`), this might work:
```suggestion
  facet_grid(cols = vars(diagnosis_group), 
             scales = "free_x",
             space = "free_x")
```

Alternatively, the old format:
```suggestion
  facet_grid(. ~ diagnosis_group, 
             scales = "free_x",
             space = "free_x")
```

(Should we change all faceting functions to use `vars()`?)

Author: We could? Or we could just use it here because we want the even spaced bars and show them `facet_grid` and `facet_wrap`. I don't feel strongly either way?

Reviewer 2: I think if we change to use `vars()` with faceting here, we should probably do it everywhere. It is the new recommended way, so we should probably convert. (This comes also with the knowledge that `purrr` is officially moving away from `~` syntax too. I happen to think this is all a great loss, but it seems to be where we are.)

Reviewer: Oh excellent, I am just writing this exact comment about whether we want to use`vars()` or `~`, so I'll not comment it again but keep the convo here.
I'm in `vars()` camp for better or worse to adhere to new style, but I am also sad about moving away from `~` more generally.

This notebook will demonstrate how to:

- Use pseudo-bulking to prepare single-cell RNA-sequencing libraries for differential expression
- Perform differential expression with the `DESeq2` package

> - Use `ggplot` and `EnhancedVolcano` to visualize gene expression changes across cell types and samples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use `ggplot2` and `EnhancedVolcano` to visualize gene expression changes across cell types and samples
```

---

Just like bulk RNA-seq, it is likely that one of the goals when performing single-cell RNA-seq will be to compare the gene expression of multiple samples to each other.

> Unlike in bulk RNA-seq analysis, single-cell RNA-seq analysis allows us to identify and annotate cell types or subpopulations of cells present in each of our samples.

Reviewer: either have "in" in the last and this sentence or neither
```suggestion
Unlike bulk RNA-seq analysis, single-cell RNA-seq analysis allows us to identify and annotate cell types or subpopulations of cells present in each of our samples.
```

This means that we can account for differences in cell type composition across samples and specifically focus on cell types or populations of interest when performing differential expression (DE) analysis.
In this notebook, we will work with multiple samples to identify differentially expressed genes across cell types of interest using the [`DESeq2`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) package. 

We will continue working with samples from the [`SCPCP000005` project](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/SCPCP000005), an investigation of pediatric solid tumors led by the Dyer and Chen labs at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.
This particular dataset contains 10 different samples that have been integrated using `fastMNN`, following the same procedure we outlined in `03-dataset_integration.Rmd`.
These 10 samples represent two different types of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS): embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS).
These two subtypes can be distinguished by the presence of the `PAX3/PAX7-FOXO1` fusion gene present only in ARMS patients.

> Additionally, cells found in ARMS tumors tend to have an increased mutational burden and cells are in a more differentiated state in comparison to ERMS tumor cells ([Shern _et al._ 2014](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0639), [Stewart _et al._](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2018.07.012)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, cells found in ARMS tumors tend to have an increased mutational burden and cells are in a more differentiated state in comparison to ERMS tumor cells ([Shern _et al._ 2014](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0639); [Stewart _et al._ 2018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2018.07.012)).
```

RMS tumors, regardless of subtype, are made up of cells typically associated with development of skeletal muscle: mesoderm, myoblasts, and myocytes ([Sebire and Malone 2003](https://doi.org/10.1136/jcp.56.6.412)).

> The group that published the data we are going to look at in this notebook identified distinct differences between ARMS and ERMS tumors. 

Reviewer 2: This sentence seems a bit vague. I don't know if we want to be more specific, or maybe just combine this sentence with the next one?

Here we will look at a subset of the samples they sequenced and walk through testing one of their hypothesis that cell types have distinct gene expression patterns in ARMS vs. ERMS samples.

## Set Up

```{r setup}
# set seed for reproducibility
set.seed(2022)

# load libraries

> library(magrittr) # the pipe (%>%)

Reviewer 2: dunno if you want to do the pipe substitution for this PR...

Author: I actually had meant to do that in the next PR and do a replace all. I'll add it in there instead.

Reviewer: Just noting that this is happening in #600 instead

library(ggplot2) # plotting functions
library(SingleCellExperiment) 

# package used for differential expression analysis
library(DESeq2)
```

We will start by reading in a `SingleCellExperiment` (SCE) object that contains both the uncorrected (merged but not integrated) and corrected (integrated) gene expression data for all 10 samples.

Prior to integration all 10 samples went through the same filtering, normalization, and dimensionality reduction.
These 10 samples were then merged into one `SingleCellExperiment` object following the same steps outlined in `03-dataset_integration.Rmd`.

> The merged object was then integrated to obtain a corrected gene expression assay and corrected reduced dimensionality results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The merged object was then integrated with `fastMNN` to obtain a corrected gene expression assay and corrected reduced dimensionality results.
```

The final SCE object was stored in `data/rms/integrated/rms_all_sce.rds`.

We also have provided a metadata file, `data/rms/annotations/rms_sample_metadata.tsv`, that contains information from each sample, such as diagnosis, sex, age, etc.
In this file each row corresponds to a sample found in the integrated SCE object.

To begin, let's set up our directories and files:

```{r filepaths}
# set up file paths 
# data directory for RMS data
data_dir <- file.path("data", "rms")

# integrated file containing all samples to use for DE analysis
integrated_sce_file <- file.path(data_dir, "integrated", "rms_all_sce.rds")

> # sample metadata with information needed to setup DE analysis

Reviewer 2: These comments may be a bit long. I'm going to file an issue to check line length in the automatically rendered versions of these notebooks, as that can be an issue.
```suggestion
# sample metadata with information needed to set up DE analysis
```

# directory to store output
deseq_dir <- file.path("analysis", "rms", "deseq")
if(!dir.exists(deseq_dir)){
  dir.create(deseq_dir, recursive = TRUE)
}

# results file to output from DE analysis
deseq_output_file <- file.path(deseq_dir, "rms_myoblast_deseq_results.tsv")
```

We can go ahead and read in the SCE object and the metadata file.

```{r read files}
# read in the SCE object that has already been integrated
integrated_sce <- readr::read_rds(integrated_sce_file)

# read in sample metadata file 
sample_metadata <- readr::read_tsv(sample_metadata_file)
```

## Dataset Exploration

Before we dive into differential expression, let's explore our integrated SCE object and the dataset a little more.

We'll start by looking at what's inside the object.
Here we should have both the original (uncorrected) data and the integrated (corrected) data for both the gene expression and the reduced dimensionality results.
How are those stored in our object?

```{r print sce}
# print out entire object
integrated_sce

# look at the assay names in our object
assayNames(integrated_sce)

# look at the names of the dimensionality reduction present in the SCE object
reducedDimNames(integrated_sce)

> ```

Reviewer 2: These shoudl probably be separate chunks, to keep the output separate when running interactively. When rendered, the chunk will be broken by the outputs, but in an interactive session, all three will appear in the same place.

When we look at the assay names we should see that there are 3 matrices, `counts`, `logcounts`, and `fastmnn_corrected`. 
The `counts` and `logcounts` assays correspond to the uncorrected gene expression data that has been merged but NOT integrated.
The `fastmnn_corrected` data contains the corrected gene expression data obtained from integration. 
For this exercise we will not be using the `fastmnn_corrected` data (more on why not once we get to setting up the differential expression), but we need to be aware that it is present and be able to distinguish it from our uncorrected data. 

In the `reducedDim` slots you should see `PCA` and `UMAP` which both correspond to the pre-integrated dimensionality reduction results.

> You should also see `fastmnn_PCA` and `fastmnn_UMAP` reduced dimensions, which correspond to the integrated results.

Reviewer: Noting that my integration notebook is using (caps) `fastMNN_PCA` and `_UMAP`. 
Should I sync up w/ here?

Author: I think up to you on which one of us should switch? For some reason I really thought you were using all lower case but there is so much to keep track of.

Reviewer 2: Weghing in in case this is not resolved, I would vote for `fastmnn_PCA`. I don't know why, except that I generally dislike mixed case for some reason.

Just like in the integration notebook, this dataset also contains the cell type annotations found in the `celltype_fine` and `celltype_broad` columns of the `colData`.
These cell types were originally assigned in [Patel _et al._ (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2022.04.003).
We will use these cell type assignments to set up the DE analysis below, but they are not required.

> It's important to note that DE analysis can be applied to any sub population of interest that is shared across samples and does not need to be explicitly defined by a cell type.

Reviewer: Note to check "sub population" vs "subpopulation" throughout notebook.

Author: I think I've been using `subpopulation` more frequently so I'm going to switch to that.

> Because we are going to be doing DE analysis between ARMS and ERMS samples, let's start by first looking at our integrated dataset and labeling our cells by which RMS subtype they are from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we are going to be doing DE analysis between ARMS and ERMS samples, let's start by labeling cells in the integrated dataset based on their RMS subtype.
```

To do this we will need to be sure that the subtype is present in the `colData` of the integrated SCE object.
If it's not there, we need to add it in.

```{r coldata head}
# look at the head of the coldata
head(colData(integrated_sce))
```

Fortunately we also have the sample metadata table that we read in earlier, which contains information about each of the samples present in the dataset.

```{r sample metadata}
# print out sample metadata
head(sample_metadata)
```

Looking at this sample table, we see a column named `subdiagnosis` which accounts for the RMS subtype, ARMS or ERMS.
We also see other columns that contain information about each specific sample and may contribute to differences seen across the samples.

We can incorporate the information in this sample metadata table into the `colData` of the integrated SCE object.
This will allow us to match each of the samples in the SCE object with the RMS subtype and also allow us to use any of the columns in the sample metadata for plotting.

```{r modify coldata}
# add the sample metadata to the colData from the integrated SCE object
coldata_df <- colData(integrated_sce) %>%

>   # convert from DataFrame to data.frame

Reviewer 2: We will have done this a few time by this point, so we might not need this comment, but it is fine to leave it in!

  as.data.frame() %>%
  # merge with sample metadata 
  dplyr::left_join(sample_metadata, by = c("sample" = "library_id")) %>%
  # create a new columns

>   dplyr::mutate(cell_id = paste(sample, barcode, sep = "-"), # combination of barcode and sample

Reviewer: We might `glue::glue()` here instead as is done in integration

                # simplify subdiagnosis for easier plotting and DE later
                diagnosis_group = forcats::fct_recode(
                  subdiagnosis,
                  "ARMS" = "Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma",
                  "ERMS" = "Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma"
                ))

# add modified data.frame back to SCE as DataFrame

> colData(integrated_sce) <- DataFrame(coldata_df, row.names = coldata_df$cell_id)

Reviewer 2: I anticipate this may push the line limit length for rendering, which may be < 80 characters
```suggestion
colData(integrated_sce) <- DataFrame(coldata_df, 
                                     row.names = coldata_df$cell_id)
```

# take a look at the new modified colData
head(colData(integrated_sce))
```

Now when we look at the `colData` of the SCE object we should see new columns, including the `diagnosis_group` column which indicates if each cell comes from an ERMS or ARMS sample.
We can now use that column to label any UMAP plots (or other plot types) that we make.
In the chunk below we will start by taking a look at our integration results and color our cells by RMS subtype.

**Reminder: You should always use the batch-corrected dimensionality reduction results for visualizing datasets containing multiple libraries or samples.**

```{r diagnosis group UMAP}
# UMAP of all samples, separating by diagnosis group
scater::plotReducedDim(integrated_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       colour_by = "diagnosis_group",
                       point_size= 0.5,
                       point_alpha = 0.2) 
```

> Interestingly, it looks like samples from the ARMS and ERMS subtypes tend to cluster with samples of the same subtype rather than cluster all together. 

Reviewer: Note that this is not a _technical_ "cluster."

In the integration notebook we also looked at the distribution of cell types after integration.
In that notebook we discussed that cells of the same cell type are expected to integrate with other cells of the same type.
Is that the case with this dataset?

A word of caution when evaluating the cell type results for this dataset: The cell types for this dataset were assigned in a two stage process as described in [Patel _et al._ (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2022.04.003).
The first stage assigned cells as tumor or non-tumor.

> The next stage further classified tumor cells into type of tumor cell (i.e., myoblast, myocyte, or mesoderm).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next stage further classified tumor cells into one of three types of tumor cells: myoblast, myocyte, or mesoderm.
```

Some samples could not be further classified, so all of their tumor cells are denoted `Tumor`.
The samples which could be further classified have a mix of `Tumor_Mesoderm`, `Tumor_Myoblast`, and `Tumor_Myocyte`.

```{r celltype UMAP}
# # UMAP of all libraries, separating by diagnosis group and labeling cell type
scater::plotReducedDim(integrated_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       # color each point by cell type
                       colour_by = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size= 0.5, 
                       point_alpha = 0.4)
```

> That doesn't appear to be the case with this dataset. 

Reviewer: Since we detoured to talk about tumor cell types I had forgotten by now what "that" meant! Can we just re-contextualize this sentence a bit?

Unlike with the previous datasets we have seen where all cells of the same cell type always grouped together, this dataset shows some slightly different patterns and not all cells of the same cell type cluster together.

> One reason is that tumor data can be heterogeneous and every tumor is unique.

Reviewer: ❄️

> Depending on the tumor type we may not expect every sample to integrate perfectly.

Reviewer: I'd be a bit more explicit - tumor types that are more heterogeneous will be harder to integrate together.

> In this particular case we are looking at two subtypes of RMS that have been shown to have distinctly different mutation burdens and differentiation states, so it's likely that those differences are contributing to how well they will be integrated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this particular case we are looking at two subtypes of RMS that have distinctl mutation burdens and differentiation states, so it's likely that those differences contribute to how well they integrate.
``

> To confirm our hypothesis that cells are grouping together both by cell type and by RMS subtype we can create a plot that incorporates both pieces of metadata.

Reviewer: I would say this more of an exploration of integration success than hypothesis, especially since we have "real" hypothesis coming up with DE testing. What do you think?

```suggestion
To explore whether cells are grouping together both by cell type and by RMS subtype, we can create a plot that incorporates both pieces of metadata.
```

> We will take advantage of the `facet_wrap()` function from `ggplot2` to look at two (or more, but we'll start with two) variables in the `colData` at once - the cell type and the subdiagnosis.

Reviewer: wait..this seems to imply we could have 3-4 facet variables, but that's too many plot dimensions for human brains.

> In the below plot we will color our cells by cell type but we will also use `facet_wrap()` to plot the cells from each subdiagnosis in their own separate panel of the plot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the below plot we will color our cells by cell type while also using `facet_wrap()` so that cells from different subdiagnoses will be in their own plot panel.
```

```{r celltype subdiagnosis UMAP}
# UMAP of all samples, separating by diagnosis group and labeling cell type
scater::plotReducedDim(integrated_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       # color each point by cell type
                       colour_by = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size= 0.5, 
                       point_alpha = 0.4,
                       # tell scater that we want to use diagnosis_group for plotting
                       other_fields = "diagnosis_group") +
  # split plots by diagnosis group 
  facet_wrap(~ diagnosis_group)
```

As expected, we see that the visual clusters of cell types are being separated, most likely due to different RMS subtypes.

We can also use a stacked barplot to look at the distribution of cell types across each sample.

```{r celltype barplot}

> # filter coldata data.frame to only include tumor cells

Reviewer: Is this our first time (or one of very few times!) using `stringr`? I'd add a comment into the pipe about `stringr::str_detect()` arguments and it returns T/F.

tumor_cells_df <- coldata_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(stringr::str_detect(celltype_broad, "Tumor"))

# create a stacked barplot
ggplot(tumor_cells_df, aes(x = sample, fill = celltype_broad)) + 
    geom_bar(position = "fill", color = "black", size = 0.2) +
    labs(

>       x = "Library",

Reviewer: sample/library?

      y = "Number of cells", 
      fill = "Cell type"
    ) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, vjust = 0.5))+
  # split by diagnosis group 
  # only show non-NA values on x-axis
  facet_grid(cols = vars(diagnosis_group), 
             scales = "free_x",
             space = "free_x")
```

Similar to the UMAP, this plot shows that ARMS and ERMS share a lot of the same cell types.

We also see that only 6 of these libraries have tumor cells that have been further classified into mesoderm, myoblast, and myocyte. 
3 libraries contain cells that are only classified as tumor or non-tumor, and tumor cells are not further classified, and the remaining library appears to not have been assigned any cell types and is not present in our plot, as they are all labeled with `NA`.
We will continue our analysis only using the 6 libraries with fully classified cell types, removing the other 3 before we proceed with differential expression.

The reason we want to pare down our list of samples to consider is that we want to ensure that the cell types (or subpopulations) that we are interested in are present in all samples included in our DE analysis. 

> We want to remove any samples that do not contain our cell population(s) of interest as they have no counts to contribute to the DE analysis.

Reviewer: There's a bit of nuance here - those 3 libraries probably do have those (or at least some) of those cell types, but we don't know which ones those are because of classification issues.

Author: This is true, but I don't think I want to get too far into the weeds of the classifications here.

This notebook will demonstrate how to:

- Use pseudo-bulking to prepare single-cell RNA-sequencing libraries for differential expression
- Perform differential expression with the `DESeq2` package
- Use `ggplot2` and `EnhancedVolcano` to visualize gene expression changes across cell types and samples

---

Just like bulk RNA-seq, it is likely that one of the goals when performing single-cell RNA-seq will be to compare the gene expression of multiple samples to each other.
Unlike bulk RNA-seq analysis, single-cell RNA-seq analysis allows us to identify and annotate cell types or subpopulations of cells present in each of our samples.
This means that we can account for differences in cell type composition across samples and specifically focus on cell types or populations of interest when performing differential expression (DE) analysis.

> In this notebook, we will work with multiple samples to identify differentially expressed genes across cell types of interest using the [`DESeq2`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) package. 

Reviewer: Would we prefer to tag this version?

```suggestion
In this notebook, we will work with multiple samples to identify differentially expressed genes across cell types of interest using the [`DESeq2`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.16/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) package. 
```

We will continue working with samples from the [`SCPCP000005` project](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/SCPCP000005), an investigation of pediatric solid tumors led by the Dyer and Chen labs at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.
This particular dataset contains 10 different samples that have been integrated using `fastMNN`, following the same procedure we outlined in `03-dataset_integration.Rmd`.
These 10 samples represent two different types of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS): embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS).
These two subtypes are distinguished by the presence of the `PAX3/PAX7-FOXO1` fusion gene, which is present only in ARMS patients.

> Additionally, cells found in ARMS tumors tend to have an increased mutational burden and cells are in a more differentiated state in comparison to ERMS tumor cells ([Shern _et al._ 2014](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0639); [Stewart _et al._ 2018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2018.07.012)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, cells found in ARMS tumors tend to have an increased mutational burden with cells in a more differentiated state compared to ERMS tumor cells ([Shern _et al._ 2014](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0639); [Stewart _et al._ 2018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2018.07.012)).
```

RMS tumors, regardless of subtype, are made up of cells typically associated with development of skeletal muscle: mesoderm, myoblasts, and myocytes ([Sebire and Malone 2003](https://doi.org/10.1136/jcp.56.6.412)).

> In [Patel _et al._ (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2022.04.003), they tested the hypothesis that cell types have distinct gene expression patterns in ARMS vs. ERMS samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Patel _et al._ (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2022.04.003) tested the hypothesis that cell types have distinct gene expression patterns in ARMS vs. ERMS samples.
```

Here we will look at a subset of the samples they sequenced and identify differentially expressed genes in tumor cells between ARMS and ERMS samples.

## Set Up

```{r setup}
# set seed for reproducibility
set.seed(2022)

# load libraries
library(magrittr) # the pipe (%>%)
library(ggplot2) # plotting functions
library(SingleCellExperiment) 

# package used for differential expression analysis
library(DESeq2)
```

We will start by reading in a `SingleCellExperiment` (SCE) object that contains both the uncorrected (merged but not integrated) and corrected (integrated) gene expression data for all 10 samples.

> Prior to integration all 10 samples went through the same filtering, normalization, and dimensionality reduction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to integration all 10 samples, went through the same filtering, normalization, and dimensionality reduction.
```

These 10 samples were then merged into one `SingleCellExperiment` object following the same steps outlined in `03-dataset_integration.Rmd`.
The merged object was then integrated with `fastMNN` to obtain a corrected gene expression assay and corrected reduced dimensionality results.
The final SCE object was stored in `data/rms/integrated/rms_all_sce.rds`.

We also have provided a metadata file, `data/rms/annotations/rms_sample_metadata.tsv`, that contains information from each sample, such as diagnosis, sex, age, etc.

> In this file each row corresponds to a sample found in the integrated SCE object.

Reviewer: This somehow sounds more right to my ear, but doesn't matter!

```suggestion
Each row in this life corresponds to a sample found in the integrated SCE object.
```

reducedDimNames(integrated_sce)
```

When we look at the assay names we should see that there are 3 matrices, `counts`, `logcounts`, and `fastmnn_corrected`. 
The `counts` and `logcounts` assays correspond to the uncorrected gene expression data that has been merged but NOT integrated.
The `fastmnn_corrected` data contains the corrected gene expression data obtained from integration. 
For this exercise we will not be using the `fastmnn_corrected` data (more on why not once we get to setting up the differential expression), but we need to be aware that it is present and be able to distinguish it from our uncorrected data. 

In the `reducedDim` slots you should see `PCA` and `UMAP` which both correspond to the pre-integrated dimensionality reduction results.
You should also see `fastmnn_PCA` and `fastmnn_UMAP` reduced dimensions, which correspond to the integrated results.

Just like in the integration notebook, this dataset also contains the cell type annotations found in the `celltype_fine` and `celltype_broad` columns of the `colData`.
These cell types were originally assigned in [Patel _et al._ (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2022.04.003).

> We will use these cell type assignments to set up the DE analysis below, but they are not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use these cell type assignments to set up the DE analysis below, but they are not required for DE analysis itself.
```

> It's important to note that DE analysis can be applied to any subpopulation of interest that is shared across samples and does not need to be explicitly defined by a cell type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to note that DE analysis can be applied to any subpopulation of interest that is shared across samples besides just cell types.
```

> Because we are going to be doing DE analysis between ARMS and ERMS samples, let's start by labeling cells in the integrated dataset based on their RMS subtype.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we'll performg DE analysis between ARMS and ERMS samples, let's start by labeling cells in the integrated dataset based on their RMS subtype.
```

To do this we will need to be sure that the subtype is present in the `colData` of the integrated SCE object.
If it's not there, we need to add it in.

```{r coldata head}
# look at the head of the coldata
head(colData(integrated_sce))
```

> 

Reviewer: We might want a transition sentence here like "uh oh, not there, where can we find it?"

Fortunately we also have the sample metadata table that we read in earlier, which contains information about each of the samples present in the dataset.

```{r sample metadata}
# print out sample metadata
head(sample_metadata)
```

Looking at this sample table, we see a column named `subdiagnosis` which accounts for the RMS subtype, ARMS or ERMS.

> We also see other columns that contain information about each specific sample and may contribute to differences seen across the samples.

Reviewer: "and may contribute to differences seen across the samples" seems like overkill here, or we would want to actually explore it?

We can incorporate the information in this sample metadata table into the `colData` of the integrated SCE object.
This will allow us to match each of the samples in the SCE object with the RMS subtype and also allow us to use any of the columns in the sample metadata for plotting.

```{r modify coldata}
# add the sample metadata to the colData from the integrated SCE object
coldata_df <- colData(integrated_sce) %>%
  # convert from DataFrame to data.frame
  as.data.frame() %>%
  # merge with sample metadata 
  dplyr::left_join(sample_metadata, by = c("sample" = "library_id")) %>%
  # create a new columns

>   dplyr::mutate(cell_id = glue::glue("{sample}-{barcode}"), # combination of barcode and sample

Reviewer: check line length here -  may get weirdly wrapped?

To explore whether cells are grouping together both by cell type and by RMS subtype, we can create a plot that incorporates both pieces of metadata.
We will take advantage of the `facet_grid()` function from `ggplot2` to look at two variables in the `colData` at once - the cell type and the subdiagnosis.
In the below plot we will color our cells by cell type while also using `facet_grid()` so that cells from different subdiagnoses will be in their own plot panel.

```{r celltype subdiagnosis UMAP}
# UMAP of all samples, separating by diagnosis group and labeling cell type
scater::plotReducedDim(integrated_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       # color each point by cell type
                       colour_by = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size= 0.5, 
                       point_alpha = 0.4,
                       # tell scater that we want to use diagnosis_group for plotting
                       other_fields = "diagnosis_group") +
  # include each diagnosis group as a separate plot in its own column
  facet_grid(cols = vars(diagnosis_group))
```

> As expected, we see that the visual clusters of cell types are being separated, most likely due to different RMS subtypes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As expected, we see that cell types are separated, most likely due to different RMS subtypes.
```

Reviewer: some phrasing was funky here, but you don't need to use my suggestion exactly.

> We can also use a stacked barplot to look at the distribution of cell types across each sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also use a stacked barplot to look at the distribution of cell types across each sample, which will require a bit of wrangling first.
```

```{r celltype barplot}

> # filter coldata data.frame to only include tumor cells

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# filter the coldata data frame to only include tumor cells
```

tumor_cells_df <- coldata_df %>%
  # find rows where the cell type name contains the string "Tumor"
  dplyr::filter(stringr::str_detect(celltype_broad, "Tumor"))

# create a stacked barplot
ggplot(tumor_cells_df, aes(x = sample, fill = celltype_broad)) + 
    geom_bar(position = "fill", color = "black", size = 0.2) +
    labs(
      x = "Sample",
      y = "Number of cells", 
      fill = "Cell type"
    ) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, vjust = 0.5))+

>   # split by diagnosis group 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # facet by diagnosis group 
```

>   # only show non-NA values on x-axis

Reviewer: which argument accomplishes this?

  facet_grid(cols = vars(diagnosis_group), 
             scales = "free_x",
             space = "free_x")
```

Similar to the UMAP, this plot shows that ARMS and ERMS share a lot of the same cell types.

We also see that only 6 of these libraries have tumor cells that have been further classified into mesoderm, myoblast, and myocyte. 

> 3 libraries contain cells that are only classified as tumor or non-tumor, and tumor cells are not further classified, and the remaining library appears to not have been assigned any cell types and is not present in our plot, as they are all labeled with `NA`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3 libraries contain cells that are only classified as tumor or non-tumor, and tumor cells are not further classified, and the remaining library is not even present in our plot because it was not assigned any cell types (all are `NA`).
```

> We will continue our analysis only using the 6 libraries with fully classified cell types, removing the other 3 before we proceed with differential expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will continue our analysis only using the 6 libraries with fully classified cell types, removing the other 4 before we proceed with differential expression.
```

  "SCPCL000491"
)

# subset sce to only contain samples with IDs of interest 
samples_to_keep <- integrated_sce$sample %in% library_ids
rms_sce <- integrated_sce[,samples_to_keep]

> # remove original integrated object 

Reviewer: say why here (for memory?)

rm(integrated_sce)
```

We now have an updated SCE object that contains 6 samples that were obtained from a mix of ARMS and ERMS patients.
We are particularly interested in identifying differentially expressed genes in tumor cell types between ARMS and ERMS.
Before we do that we need to ensure that we have enough biological replicates from each group to set up our experiment. 
It is imperative to consider good experimental design and ensure that we have enough biological replicates (at least > 3 for each group) when performing differential gene expression analysis.

> Here one sample, or group of cells collected together, from one piece of tissue is one biological replicate.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a bit confusing, but I think we can probably just leave it off.

We can count how many samples we have from each diagnosis group to ensure we have enough replicates.

```{r count diagnosis}
# total how many of each diagnosis group are left after subsetting 
sample_metadata %>%
  dplyr::filter(library_id %in% library_ids) %>%
  dplyr::count(subdiagnosis)
```

> We have 3 ARMS and 3 ERMS samples which is great! 

Reviewer: "great" vs "fine"? ;)

We can now proceed forward with these 6 samples to identify differentially expressed genes in each of the shared cell types.
Lets take another look at the cell types found in these libraries and also how many of each cell type are present in our dataset.

```{r celltype table}
# look at distribution of cell types across all libraries 
as.data.frame(colData(rms_sce)) %>%

>   # count number of cells in each cell type

Reviewer: Noting that line 153 pipes `colData(rms_sce)` into `as.data.frame()`. Doesn't super matter for consistency but pointing it out!

  "SCPCL000491"
)

# subset sce to only contain samples with IDs of interest 
samples_to_keep <- integrated_sce$sample %in% library_ids
rms_sce <- integrated_sce[,samples_to_keep]

> # remove original integrated object to save some memory

Reviewer: Oh boy I read this as save money (even though this was originally my comment) and I was like, "wow, does this really affect server cost!? I'm surprised!"
Having fun!

rm(integrated_sce)

# print out our new sce 
rms_sce
```

We now have an updated SCE object that contains 6 samples that were obtained from a mix of ARMS and ERMS patients.

> We are particularly interested in identifying DE genes in tumor cell types between ARMS and ERMS.

Reviewer: I'd spell out DE here since it's got some grammar vs DE which I tend to read as "differential expression" (but is that just me?)
```suggestion
We are particularly interested in identifying differentially expressed genes for specific tumor cell types between ARMS and ERMS.
```

Reviewer: I'll note one could phrase this as a question, something like: "We want to ask, Are specific tumor cell types differentially expressed between ARMS and ERMS?"

Ok either way!

We should also make sure that we have enough biological replicates from each group to set up our experiment. 

> It is imperative to consider good experimental design and ensure that we have enough biological replicates (at least > 3 for each group) when performing differential gene expression analysis.

Reviewer: at least 3, not at least >3!
although we can dream..

```suggestion
It is imperative to consider good experimental design and ensure that we have enough biological replicates (at least 3 for each group) when performing differential gene expression analysis.
```

  "SCPCL000491"
)

# subset sce to only contain samples with IDs of interest 
samples_to_keep <- integrated_sce$sample %in% library_ids
rms_sce <- integrated_sce[,samples_to_keep]

> # remove original integrated object to save some memory

Reviewer 2: For a modicum of "safety" I would move the removal to _after_ printing out the new SCE. Always check what you have before removing something that might take some time to reload/reproduce!

"Now that we know we have what we want, we can remove the old version to save memory."

rm(integrated_sce)

> # print out our new sce 

Reviewer 2: I have been capitalizing SCE when not in a variable name or similar. I just noticed this one, but we probably want to be consistent.
```suggestion
# print out our new SCE 
```

rms_sce
```

We now have an updated SCE object that contains 6 samples that were obtained from a mix of ARMS and ERMS patients.
We can then ask the question, do specific tumor cell types contain sets of differentially expressed genes between ARMS and ERMS samples?

We should make sure that we have enough biological replicates from each group to set up our experiment. 
It is imperative to consider good experimental design and ensure that we have enough biological replicates (at least 3 for each group) when performing differential gene expression analysis.

If we look back at our stacked barplot we see that we picked 3 ARMS and 3 ERMS samples.
We can also see that the majority of cells are tumor cells, in particular the largest population of cells appears to be the `Tumor_Myoblast`. 

> For this example we will focus on identifying DE genes in one cell type, the `Tumor_Myoblast` cells, but the principles applied below can be applied to any cell types or subpopulations of interest.

Reviewer 2: Just tightening up a bit.
```suggestion
For this example we will focus on identifying DE genes in these `Tumor_Myoblast` cells, but the principles applied below can be applied to any cell types or subpopulations of interest.
```
